docs: bootloader: Add a user guide (#3607)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/ug_fw_update.rst

.. _ug_fw_update:

Firmware updates
################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

This user guide provides an overview of firmware updates with |NCS|.

.. _ug_fw_update_keys:

Signature keys
**************

You can find information on the key types supported in the |NCS| in the :ref:`nRF Secure Immutable Bootloader <bootloader_signature_keys>` and :ref:`mcuboot:imgtool` documentation.

Generating private keys
=======================

> The most common ways, supported by the |NCS|, to generate private/public key pairs are the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|NCS| supports the following most common ways to generate private/public key pairs:
```

Reviewer 2: fixed

* :ref:`ug_fw_update_keys_openssl`
* :ref:`ug_fw_update_keys_imgtool`

> * :ref:`ug_fw_update_keys_python`

Reviewer: In ug_bootloader_adding.html#adding-a-custom-signature-key-file we state Python is the default method and list is as the first one. Any reason for listing Python as the last one here?

Reviewer 2: @kyberdin

Author: @greg-fer I placed Python lowest on this list because I consider OpenSSL to be the de-factor standard tool for these sort of operations, and it supports a large number of keys, making it the most useful of the list to have recommended first.

The Python method here relies on the `ecdsa` package and is only relevant for creating private/public keys for ECDSA256, making it less important than `imgtool` or OpenSSL for this walkthrough. It is "default" in our build system in that `b0` will use it to autogenerate ECDSA keys when none are specified by the user. However, the docs introduced here highlight that developers should not rely on these for their projects and provide their own of whichever supported type they prefer.

Imgtool
-------

:ref:`mcuboot:imgtool` is a Python tool maintained by MCUboot.
It provides functionalities for handling public/private key pairs.

It is also available as a PyPI package that you can install via ``pip``.
However, when working within the |NCS| framework, it is recommended to use the script that is included with the fork of MCUboot used by the |NCS|.

See below for examples of imgtool used to create some commonly used key types:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: ECDSA

      .. code-block:: console

         python3 bootlooader/mcuboot/scripts/imgtool.py keygen -t ecdsa-p256 -k priv.pem

   .. group-tab:: RSA-2048

      .. code-block:: console

         python3 bootlooader/mcuboot/scripts/imgtool.py keygen -t rsa-2048 -k priv.pem

For a full list of the supported types, use the ``--help`` argument with the tool or any of its commands.

.. _ug_fw_update_keys_python:

Python
------

The |NCS| ships with an internal script used for interacting with private/public keys with the |NSIB|.
This script is maintained by the |NCS| team and utilizes the ``ecdsa`` package available from PyPI.
As such, it is only valid for use with ECDSA keys.

.. code-block:: console

>    python3 nrf/scripts/bootloader/keygen.py --private -o priv.pem

Reviewer: What does this command do? Please introduce it properly.

Reviewer 2: @kyberdin please check this

.. _ug_fw_update_development_keys:

Development keys
================

When testing the bootloader chain, generating and using custom signing keys is optional.
If you do not provide your own keys through Kconfig options, the build system will automatically create debug keys, depending on the bootloader(s) compiled into the application.

.. caution::

>    Keys that are automatically used or generated by bootloaders for image signature validation are intended for *development and/or debug use only*.

Reviewer: `and/or` is not allowed. Rephrase to `only for development or debug use, or both`.

   Applications should *never* go into production when they are not protected by secure keys.
   It is strongly encouraged to create and store these keys in a safe location, not only to protect the security of the application but also to ensure that the hardware can receive firmware updates throughout the project lifecycle.

>    Moreover, while default keys for MCUboot are tracked in its repository, and are therefore publicly visible, the development/debug keys autogenerated by |NSIB| will change *whenever the build directory is rebuilt*, that is, building without the build directory already existing.

Reviewer: `development or debug keys`

Not sure if I get the meaning of "without the build directory already existing". I think the start of the next sentence explains it better with a more direct phrasing.

>    If a build directory is removed and rebuilt from scratch, relying on the default ECDSA key for signing an application or upgradable second-stage bootloader image will result in a failed boot chain validation, if you are not programming also the |NSIB|.

Reviewer: Can the two ifs be merged into one? Or the second if can be split into a separate sentence? "This will only happen if [...]"?

   You can avoid this issue by storing a custom private key outside of the build directory during development.

.. _ug_fw_update_key_revocation:

> Public key revocation

Reviewer: Isn't this a task? `Revoking public keys`?

=====================

The |NSIB| supports the revocation of public signing keys that are available to validate the next image in the secure boot chain.
Key revocation can be an useful security or backup tool for devices that have already been deployed to the field.
If a private key has been compromised or lost, its public key can be invalidated by uploading a new firmware image signed by another key known to the bootloader.

These keys are kept internally by the bootloader, so the list of available public keys cannot change once it is deployed.
See :option:`CONFIG_SB_PUBLIC_KEY_FILES` for details on how this mechanism is implemented.

You can add this feature to your own project and check its functionality as follows:

> 1. Use this :ref:`Python tool <ug_fw_update_keys_python>` to generate two or more private keys for the application and then extract a public key for each one:

Reviewer: `this Python tool` does not make me think of the Python script described below. I was expecting a download link to a Python tool at the first moment. Maybe `the bootloader Python script`?

   .. code-block:: console

      python3 nrf/scripts/bootloader/keygen.py --public -i priv.pem -o pub.pem

#. Compile the application and bootloader with the relevant configurations, using only absolute paths:

   .. code-block:: console

      CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT=y
      CONFIG_SB_SIGNING_KEY_FILE="/path/to/priv_a.pem"
      CONFIG_SB_PUBLIC_KEY_FILES="/path/to/pub_b.pem,/path/to/pub_c.pem"

   .. note::

>       The public key associated with the original private signing key should not be included in the public key list.

Reviewer: `should` is not recommended. Does this `should` mean the public key could be included in some cases? If so, `can` is better. Does this `should` convey an obligation not to include the key? If so, use `must not`. Either way, what is the reason?

#. Program the application to the target development kit and :ref:`check its console output <ug_bootloader_adding_testing>`.
   With the first firmware version, ``priv_a.pem`` and ``pub_a.pem`` are used for signing and validating the image.

   .. code-block:: console

      *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
      Attempting to boot slot 0.
      Attempting to boot from address 0x9000.
      Verifying signature against key 0.
      Hash: 0xda...4f
      Firmware signature verified.
      Firmware version 1
      *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
      ...

#. To revoke a single or multiple keys, rebuild the application using the private key associated with a key listed *after* the currently used key in the list.
   For example, when compiling with the ``priv_c.pem`` key, images signed with ``priv_a.pem`` or ``priv_b.pem`` will no longer boot when uploaded into an image slot.

>    Modify the configuration settings as follows, including a new firmware version:

Reviewer: Looks like this step includes two steps: rebuild and modify. Maybe split it into substeps?

Reviewer 2: fixed

   .. code-block:: console

      CONFIG_BUILD_S1_VARIANT=y
      CONFIG_SB_SIGNING_KEY_FILE="/path/to/priv_c.pem"
      CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION=2

#. Deploy the firmware update.

>    Observe the bootloader checking the hashes of the public keys against the new image, then invalidating the earlier keys:

Reviewer: Same as above: two steps in one, by the look of it.

Reviewer 2: fixed

   .. code-block:: console

      *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
      Attempting to boot slot 1.
      Attempting to boot from address 0x84800.
      Verifying signature against key 0.
      Hash: 0xda...4f
      Public key didn't match, try next.
      Verifying signature against key 1.
      Hash: 0x5c...f5
      Public key didn't match, try next.
      Verifying signature against key 2.
      Hash: 0x19...73
      Invalidating key 0.
      Invalidating key 1.
      Firmware signature verified.
      Firmware version 2
      Setting monotonic counter (version: 2, slot: 1)
      *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
      ...

Testing
-------

> You can test that the bootloader will no longer boot images signed with the earlier keys by uploading an image signed with one of them.

Reviewer: This should be a step-based procedure using numbered steps, not steps in separate paragraphs.

Reviewer 2: fixed

.. code-block:: console

   CONFIG_SB_SIGNING_KEY_FILE="/path/to/priv_b.pem"
   CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION=3

To facilitate testing, you can use ``nrfjprog`` to program this image directly into a slot:

.. code-block:: console

   nrfjprog -f nRF52 -r --verify --program build/zephyr/signed_by_b0_s0_image.hex --sectorerase

Observe the bootloader catching the invalid image and booting the valid image in the other slot:

.. code-block:: console

   *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
   Attempting to boot slot 0.
   Attempting to boot from address 0x9000.
   Firmware has been invalidated: 0x91020000.
   Failed to validate, permanently invalidating!
   Attempting to boot slot 1.
   Attempting to boot from address 0x84800.
   Key 0 has been invalidated, try next.
   Key 1 has been invalidated, try next.
   Verifying signature against key 2.
   Hash: 0x19...73
   Invalidating key 0.
   Invalidating key 1.
   Firmware signature verified.
   Firmware version 2
   *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
   ...

Recompiling with ``priv_c.pem`` and the incremented firmware version will correctly boot into the new image.

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions:

> Image versions

Reviewer: `Configuring image versioning`? I was expecting conceptual information at first glance, then I saw this section is about configuring versioning.

**************

With the |NCS|, versioning an image for use in firmware releases and updates depends on the type of bootloader that will be booting into the new firmware release.

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions_b0:

|NSIB|
======

> See the bootloader's :ref:`bootloader_monotonic_counter` documentation for more information.

Reviewer: This link leads to a section that asks me to check CONFIG_SB_MONOTONIC_COUNTER docs and mentions two other Kconfig options. Wouldn't it be easier to provide the list of the Kconfig options here or actually move the bulk of the info from the sample docs to here?

Reviewer 2: fixed

.. code-block:: console

   python3 nrf/scripts/bootloader/keygen.py --private -o priv.pem

.. _ug_fw_update_development_keys:

Using development keys
======================

When testing the bootloader chain, generating and using custom signing keys is optional.
If you do not provide your own keys through Kconfig options, the build system will automatically create debug keys, depending on the bootloaders compiled into the application.

.. caution::

   Keys that are automatically used or generated by bootloaders for image signature validation are intended for *development or debug use only*.

   Applications should *never* go into production when they are not protected by secure keys.
   It is strongly encouraged to create and store these keys in a safe location, not only to protect the security of the application but also to ensure that the hardware can receive firmware updates throughout the project lifecycle.

   Moreover, while the default keys for MCUboot are tracked in its repository, and are therefore publicly visible, the development/debug keys autogenerated by |NSIB| will change whenever the build directory is removed and rebuilt from scratch.

>    If you are also not programming the |NSIB| when this happens, relaying on the default ECDSA key to sign an application or an upgradable second-stage bootloader image will result in a failed boot chain validation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   If you are also not programming the |NSIB| when this happens, relying on the default ECDSA key to sign an application or an upgradable second-stage bootloader image will result in a failed boot chain validation.
```

Author: Updated in latest commit.

   You can avoid this issue by storing a custom private key outside of the build directory during development.

.. _ug_fw_update_key_revocation:

Revoking private keys
=====================

> The |NSIB| supports the revocation of public signing keys that are available to validate the next image in the secure boot chain.

Reviewer 3: Reworded a bit, see if you agree.
```suggestion
The |NSIB| allows you to revoke public verification keys used to validate the next image in the secure boot chain.
```

Author: Updated in latest commit.

> Key revocation can be an useful security or backup tool for devices that have already been deployed to the field.

Reviewer 3: "backup tool" gives slightly confusing connotations here IMO.

Author: Removed and tweaked the wording accordingly in latest commit.

      Verifying signature against key 1.
      Hash: 0x5c...f5
      Public key didn't match, try next.
      Verifying signature against key 2.
      Hash: 0x19...73
      Invalidating key 0.
      Invalidating key 1.
      Firmware signature verified.
      Firmware version 2
      Setting monotonic counter (version: 2, slot: 1)
      *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
      ...

You can test that the bootloader will no longer boot images signed with the earlier keys by uploading an image signed with one of them.

1. To do this, recompile the application with the following options:

   .. code-block:: console

      CONFIG_SB_SIGNING_KEY_FILE="/path/to/priv_b.pem"
      CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION=3

#. To facilitate testing, you can use ``nrfjprog`` to program this image directly into a slot:

   .. code-block:: console

      nrfjprog -f nRF52 -r --verify --program build/zephyr/signed_by_b0_s0_image.hex --sectorerase

#. Observe the bootloader catching the invalid image and booting the valid image in the other slot:

   .. code-block:: console

      *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
      Attempting to boot slot 0.
      Attempting to boot from address 0x9000.

>       Firmware has been invalidated: 0x91020000.

Reviewer 3: This indicates that the image has already been invalidated. The output should be something like 

      Key 0 has been invalidated, try next.
      Key 1 has been invalidated, try next.
      Verifying signature against key 2.
      Hash: 0x19...73
      Public key didn't match, try next.
      Failed to validate signature.

Author: Was able to reproduce with the output that you referenced. Updated the docs in the latest commit (will be squashed after review).

> .. _ug_fw_update:

Reviewer 2: @melwee01 I can't recall any page of the gs guide that refers to firmware updates. Do you have a specific page in mind?

Firmware updates
################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

This user guide provides an overview of firmware updates with |NCS|.

.. _ug_fw_update_keys:

Signature keys
**************

You can find information on the key types supported in the |NCS| in the :ref:`nRF Secure Immutable Bootloader <bootloader_signature_keys>` and :doc:`mcuboot:imgtool` documentation.

Generating private keys
=======================

|NCS| supports the following most common ways to generate private/public key pairs:

* :ref:`ug_fw_update_keys_openssl`
* :ref:`ug_fw_update_keys_imgtool`
* :ref:`ug_fw_update_keys_python`

.. _ug_fw_update_keys_openssl:

Using OpenSSL to generate keys
------------------------------

`OpenSSL`_ is installed by default with some packages and programs, like *git*.

> It supports many different types of keys, but not all of them are supported by |NSIB| and MCUboot.

Reviewer 2: It is explained at line 22

See below for examples of using OpenSSL to create some commonly used key types:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: ECDSA

      .. code-block:: console

         openssl ecparam -name prime256v1 -genkey -noout -out priv.pem

   .. group-tab:: RSA-2048

      .. code-block:: console

         openssl genrsa -out priv.pem 2048

.. note::

   ``priv.pem``, ``priv_*.pem``, and ``pub_*.pem`` are keys named arbitrarily and used as an example in this documentation.
   You can name private and public keys used with Zephyr and the |NCS| as you prefer, as long as the files are in the ``.pem`` format.

> To see a complete list of the supported key types, call ``openssl help`` and ``openssl <key type> -help`` from a terminal.

Author: Relocated to that line.

.. _ug_fw_update_keys_imgtool:

Using Imgtool to generate keys
------------------------------

:doc:`mcuboot:imgtool` is a Python tool maintained by MCUboot.
It provides functionalities for handling public/private key pairs.

It is also available as a PyPI package that you can install via ``pip``.
However, when working within the |NCS| framework, it is recommended to use the script that is included with the fork of MCUboot used by the |NCS|.

> See below for examples of imgtool used to create some commonly used key types:

Author: The [image tool docs](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/mcuboot/imgtool.html) refer to it as `imgtool` in the docs, so I'd vote for keeping it lowercase.

For a full list of the supported types, use the ``--help`` argument with the tool or any of its commands.

.. _ug_fw_update_keys_python:

Using Python to generate keys
-----------------------------

The |NCS| ships with an internal script used for interacting with private/public keys with the |NSIB|.
This script is maintained by the |NCS| team and utilizes the ``ecdsa`` package available from PyPI.
As such, it is only valid for use with ECDSA keys.

See below for an example of this internal Python script used to generate keys.

.. code-block:: console

   python3 nrf/scripts/bootloader/keygen.py --private -o priv.pem

.. _ug_fw_update_development_keys:

Using development keys
======================

When testing the bootloader chain, generating and using custom signing keys is optional.
If you do not provide your own keys through Kconfig options, the build system will automatically create debug keys, depending on the bootloaders compiled into the application.

.. caution::

   Keys that are automatically used or generated by bootloaders for image signature validation are intended for *development or debug use only*.

>    Applications should *never* go into production when they are not protected by secure keys.

Author: I think this specific line is a good statement to keep, so I made the following line more assertive than encouraging.

      Firmware version 2
      *** Booting Zephyr OS build ...  ***
      ...

Recompiling with ``priv_c.pem`` and the incremented firmware version will correctly boot into the new image.

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions:

Configuring image versions
**************************

With the |NCS|, versioning an image for use in firmware releases and updates depends on the type of bootloader that will be booting into the new firmware release.

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions_b0:

Using |NSIB|
============

.. include:: /../../samples/bootloader/README.rst
   :start-after: bootloader_monotonic_counter_start
   :end-before: bootloader_monotonic_counter_end

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions_mcuboot:

Using MCUboot
=============

Currently, the only versioning supported by the |NCS| for applications validated by MCUboot is *semantic versioning*.
To assign a semantic version number to your application, pass the version string into the :option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMAGE_VERSION` option for the application:

.. code-block:: console

   CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMAGE_VERSION="0.1.2+3"

See the `Semantic versioning`_ webpage or documentation for :doc:`mcuboot:imgtool` for details on version syntax.

> Unless :ref:`ug_fw_update_image_versions_mcuboot_downgrade` is desired for your application in the field, defining these versions for an image serves no purpose within the |NCS| framework, and does not prevent downgrades from normal firmware updates.

Author: Opposite - specifying a semantic version for an application via MCUboot does nothing within the NCS framework by itself. So an application with `2.0.0` as its semantic version can be replaced by one that has `1.0.0` _unless_ MCUboot is compiled with downgrade prevention, linked here.

I have reworded this a bit to hopefully make it more clear here.

See the Kconfig documentation of this option for more details about its use within the |NCS|.

> If the use of semantic versioning is for organizing images created during development, it is instead recommended to create copies of the relevant :ref:`build output files <mcuboot:mcuboot_ncs>` that use the version scheme in their file name or path.

Author: This sentence overall isn't very important, and I think many developers would arrive at this conclusion without us having to mention it. Removed.
